NFS storage documentation (#835)
netgroup-polito/CrownLabs: infrastructure/storage-provisioning/README.md

$ kubectl delete -f examples/wordpress.yaml
$ kubectl delete -f examples/mysql.yaml
```

> ## Rook NFS

Reviewer: Yes, each user has its own namespace, where the PVC is created

> ## Rook NFS

Author: No, in the last version all the PVCs are created in a separate namespace that must already be present and the name of the namespace passed as an argument to the Tenant Operator.

> ## Rook NFS

Author: I'm thinking that the fact that the PVCs are created inside a single namespace and the quota for each user is something that would be better described in the Tenant Operator's documentation(?)

> ## Rook NFS

Reviewer 2: @matteorosani 👍 
Please proceed!

> To use the user's personal storage we decided to use the NFS server provided by Rook-Ceph ([here](https://rook.io/docs/rook/v1.10/Storage-Configuration/NFS/nfs/)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The personal storage space attached to VMs and containers leverages the NFS server provided by Rook-Ceph ([here](https://rook.io/docs/rook/v1.10/Storage-Configuration/NFS/nfs/)).
```

> With the `CephNFS` CRD we configure a NFS-Ganesha server to provide the access to the user's personal storage via NFS inside the cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> A `StorageClass` is used for the dynamic provisioning of the user's storage. In this `StorageClass` is specified, via specific parameters for the Rook Operator, to create also a NFS share to which the user can later connect to via the NFS protocol.

Reviewer 2: The user's storage is dynamically provisioned through a `StorageClass` that contains a set of parameters that tell the Rook Operator to create also a NFS share; this is later mounted from user's VMs and containers though the NFS protocol.

To create the necessary resources:
```bash
$ kubectl create -f nfs-manifests/nfs.yaml
$ kubectl create -f nfs-manifests/storageclass.yaml
```

Be aware that to use this feature the system must be configured with:
- Rook v1.9.1 or greather
- Ceph v16.2.7 or greather

> ### Using the NFS service

Reviewer 2: I would say something about quotas here: is it guaranteed?
Just something "Per-user parameters such as disk quota can be specified in XXX".

Author: The parameter for the quota of the user is in the Tenant Operator. Is used for the PVC size.
The parameter is described in the operators/README.md with the other parameters.

Using the NFS service inside VirtualMachines requires the `nfs-common` package for Debian based linux OSs and the `nfs-utils` for CentOS based VMs.

> On Container instances the DNS resolution for the service name is done on the host machine that doesn't have access to the Kubernetes cluster's DNS server. So to make this solution work the host machine must be able to resolve the DNS name for the NFS server adding the record to the host's `/etc/resolv.conf` either manually or with an automated process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The DNS resolution for the service name on Container instances is done on the host machine, which does not have access to the Kubernetes cluster's DNS server.
To allow the host machine to resolve the DNS name for the NFS server you need to add the proper record to the host's `/etc/resolv.conf`, either manually or with an automated process (e.g., cloud-init).
```
NOTE: which record do I have to add? I'm kind of lost here.

Reviewer: I will add a more detailed explanation

$ kubectl delete -f examples/wordpress.yaml
$ kubectl delete -f examples/mysql.yaml
```

## Rook NFS
The personal storage disk attached to VMs and containers is bassd on the NFS server provided by Rook-Ceph ([here](https://rook.io/docs/rook/v1.10/Storage-Configuration/NFS/nfs/)), which can be configured with the `CephNFS` CRD of the NFS-Ganesha server.

The user's storage is dynamically provisioned through a `StorageClass` that contains a set of parameters that tell the Rook Operator to create also a NFS share; this is later mounted from user's VMs and containers though the NFS protocol.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A single PV is created that contains all the user's personal space; then, multiple PVCs are created, one for each user, to mount the home folder in VMs and containers.
PVCs are created in a separate namespace that must already be present and the name of the namespace is passed as argument to the Tenant Operator.

```

Author: I don't think this is correct. One PV and one PVC are created for each user. These is not a single PV for all users.

Reviewer 2: I understood that you created a single volume for all the users, isn't it?
Then, multiple PVC, one per user, to attach to the personal storage.
Am I wrong?

Author: We create a PVC for the user with a specified storage class, then the Rook operator provides a PV for that PVC dynamically. So at the end there is a PVC and a PV for each user.

To create the necessary resources:
```bash
$ kubectl create -f nfs-manifests/nfs.yaml
$ kubectl create -f nfs-manifests/storageclass.yaml
```

Be aware that to use this feature the system must be configured with:
- Rook v1.9.1 or greather
- Ceph v16.2.7 or greather

### Using the NFS service
Mounting NFS shares inside Virtual Machines may require an additional software package, e.g., `nfs-common` package for Debian-based VMs, and `nfs-utils` for CentOS-based VMs.

> The DNS resolution for the service name on Container instances is done on the host machine, which does not have access to the Kubernetes cluster's DNS server.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The DNS resolution for the service name on Container instances is done by the software running on the physical server (i.e., kubelet), which does not have access to the Kubernetes cluster's DNS server.
```

To allow the host machine to resolve the DNS name for the NFS server you need to add the proper record to the host's `/etc/resolv.conf`, either manually or with an automated process (e.g., ansible).

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This record should resolve the _standard_ name used by Kubernetes pods to access to the storage service (e.g., 
`rook-ceph-nfs-rook-nfs-primary-rook-ceph.cluster.local`) to the cluster IP address used by that service, such as in the following example of a possible `/etc/resolv.conf` file:
```

> An example view of `/etc/resolv.conf` with the proper record to resolve the DNS name for the NFS server:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

```bash
$ cat /etc/resolv.conf

> rook-ceph-nfs-rook-nfs-primary-rook-ceph.cluster.local 8.8.8.8

Author: VM's are able to resolve the DNS name of the NFS service because they do it from inside the cluster itself.
On the other hand for the Containers the resolution is done by the machine that hosts the Kubelet, I don't know why it is done this way, but I've seen from tests that this is the way it works (also with Iorio we've seen it).
So a workaround is to add to the machines that host the Kubelet the DNS resolution for the NFS service with the cluster IP or the DNS resolution for the Kubernetes internal DNS server (to resolve all kind of services inside the cluster).
It is not done automatically. We've talked about a possible solution using an Ansible dedicated to this purpose, but has not been implemented by us.

> rook-ceph-nfs-rook-nfs-primary-rook-ceph.cluster.local 8.8.8.8

Reviewer 2: Got it, I slightly modified the text. Please check that is ok.
Still open the other question: "Which IP address do I have to add? The cluster-IP one?"

> rook-ceph-nfs-rook-nfs-primary-rook-ceph.cluster.local 8.8.8.8

Author: Yes the cluster IP

$ kubectl delete -f examples/wordpress.yaml
$ kubectl delete -f examples/mysql.yaml
```

## Rook NFS
The personal storage disk attached to VMs and containers is based on the NFS server provided by Rook-Ceph ([here](https://rook.io/docs/rook/v1.10/Storage-Configuration/NFS/nfs/)), which can be configured with the `CephNFS` CRD of the NFS-Ganesha server.

> The user's storage is dynamically provisioned through a `StorageClass` that contains a set of parameters that tell the Rook Operator to create also a NFS share; this is later mounted from user's VMs and containers though the NFS protocol.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The user's storage is dynamically provisioned through PVCs based on a `StorageClass` that contains a set of parameters used by the Rook Operator in order to create a NFS share; this is later mounted from user's VMs and containers though the NFS protocol.
```

To create the necessary resources:
```bash
$ kubectl create -f nfs-manifests/nfs.yaml
$ kubectl create -f nfs-manifests/storageclass.yaml
```

Be aware that to use this feature the system must be configured with:

> - Rook v1.9.1 or greather
> - Ceph v16.2.7 or greather

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Rook v1.9.1 or greater
- Ceph v16.2.7 or greater
```

### Using the NFS service

> Mounting NFS shares inside Virtual Machines may require an additional software package, e.g., `nfs-common` package for Debian-based VMs, and `nfs-utils` for CentOS-based VMs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Mounting NFS shares inside Virtual Machines may require additional software, e.g., `nfs-common` package for Debian-based VMs, and `nfs-utils` for CentOS-based VMs. Kubernetes nodes will need to be provisioned with the same software in order to enable the kubelet to attach them to containers.
```

> The DNS resolution for the service name on Container instances is done by the software running on the physical server (i.e., kubelet), which does not have access to the Kubernetes cluster's DNS server.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The DNS resolution for the service name of Rook's NFS server on Container instances is done by the software running on the physical server (i.e., kubelet), which does not have access to the Kubernetes cluster's DNS server.
```

> To allow the host machine to resolve the DNS name for the NFS server you need to add the proper record to the host's `/etc/resolv.conf`, either manually or with an automated process (e.g., ansible).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To allow the host machine to resolve such DNS name, several solution can be implemented, for example adding the proper record to the host's `/etc/resolv.conf`, either manually or with an automated process (e.g., ansible). This operation should to be done right after the creation or modification of the NFS service, that would cause the allocation of the service cluster IP address.
```

> This record should resolve the _standard_ name used by Kubernetes pods to access to the storage service (e.g., `rook-ceph-nfs-rook-nfs-primary-rook-ceph.cluster.local`) to the cluster IP address used by that service, such as in the following example of a possible `/etc/resolv.conf` file:
> 
> ```bash
> $ cat /etc/resolv.conf
> 
> rook-ceph-nfs-rook-nfs-primary-rook-ceph.cluster.local 8.8.8.8

Reviewer 3: - `resolv.conf` is used to setup DNS servers, `hosts` file instead is used for static name resolution, which is our case
- you forgot the namespace name in the dns name example you provided (I also put the one that's actually live on the cluster)

```suggestion
This record should resolve the _standard_ name used by Kubernetes pods to access to the storage service (e.g., `rook-ceph-nfs-rook-nfs-primary-a.rook-ceph.cluster.local`) to the cluster IP address used by that service, such as in the following example of a possible `/etc/hosts` file:

```bash
$ cat /etc/hosts

rook-ceph-nfs-rook-nfs-primary-a.rook-ceph.cluster.local 8.8.8.8
```
